<!-- gid:20250422T174538 -->
[[TIP("이 노트에 대하여")]]
Prot의 정규식 기초 자료를 바탕으로 Emacs 안에서 isearch와 query-replace, keep-lines, flush-lines를 어떻게 쓸지 정리한다. 정규표현식 실전 입문 노트다.
[[/TIP]]

## BIBLIOGRAPHY

  Stavrou, Protesilaos. 2020. “Primer on Regular Expressions inside of Emacs.” January 23, 2020. [https://protesilaos.com/codelog/2020-01-23-emacs-regexp-primer/](https://protesilaos.com/codelog/2020-01-23-emacs-regexp-primer/).

## History

-   [2025-04-22 Tue 17:45] 2020년도 자료인데 옮긴다. Primer on regular expressions inside of Emacs [정규표현식](https://notes.junghanacs.com/meta/20230727T091700/) 를 본다면

(Stavrou 2020)

-   Stavrou, Protesilaos
-   In this video tutorial I show how to use regexp notation to solve practical problems in Emacs. Protesilaos

Emacs has a few ways to operate on regexp matches, such as:

-   `isearch`
-   `query-replace`
-   `keep-lines`
-   `flush-lines`

To make our life easier, we can practice with the built-in `regexp-builder` or the third-party package `visual-regexp`. This demo will rely on the latter.

If you have the manual you can run `C-h r i regexp` to get to the relevant chapter. **Do it!**

### Line boundaries

The caret `^` denotes the beginning of the line.

The dollar sign `$` marks the end.

Match all lines that start with a space:

Emacs Emacs Emacs Emacs Emacs

And all that end with a capital `S`:

emacs emacS emacS emacs emacs emacs emacS emacS

헤드라인을 네로우 하면 여기에 집중할 수 있다. 여기서 말하는 것은 isearch-regex 를 이용해서 라인 바운더리를 오가는 것이다. 만약 맨 뒤에 S 만 있는 라인을 가려면 `isearch-toggle-regexp` 에서 S$ 을 입력하면 된다. evil 에도 뭔가 있을 텐데 프롯은 정통파라

### Remove or keep lines

Remove the empty lines. Then keep the ones that contain "username".

&lt;username&gt;&lt;\![CDATA[name]]&gt;&lt;/username&gt; emacs emacS emacS emacs emacs emacs emacS emacS

&lt;userName&gt;&lt;\![CDATA[nom]]&gt;&lt;/userName&gt; emacs emacS emacS emacs emacs emacs emacS emacS

&lt;username&gt;&lt;\![CDATA[name]]&gt;&lt;/username&gt; emacs emacS emacS emacs emacs emacs emacS emacS

`whitespace-mode` 를 켜니까 공백이 다 보인다. 와. 몰랐다. `SPC t w` 에 바인딩 되어 있네.

마우스로 영역 잡고 `flush-lines` ^$ 하니까 빈 라인이 다 사라졌다. 와우! 그 다음에 `keep-lines` username 을 적으면 username 이 없는 라인은 다 사라진다.

### The dot character

The dot or full stop `.` means matches every character except the newline.

Match these words using their common part `ired` as a string.

dired fired mired tired wired

&gt; Mark saved where search started [2 times] 이게 뭔가? set-mark 를 어떻게 꺼내 쓰는가?

### Character sets and ranges

A set of individual characters is marked between brackets `[]`.

Sets can be written as ranges:

| Range      | Scope                                      |
|------------|--------------------------------------------|
| [a-z]      | all lower cases alphabetic characters      |
| [A-Za-z]   | all upper or lower case letters            |
| [a-z0-9]   | lower case alphabet or numbers 0 through 9 |
| [abcd1234] | letters a,b,c,d and numbers 1,2,3,4        |

Match both of those using a character set for the first letter:

emacs Emacs

Match those that end with a number:

Emacs emacs-27 emacs-26 GNU emacs

해보자! 어떻게 하나면! 잘 된다.

### Difference between postfix operators ?, +, \*

"Postfix" means that it comes after a given set and alters its scope. "포스트픽스"는 주어진 집합 뒤에 와서 그 범위를 변경하는 것을 의미합니다.

`?` match the previous term zero or one time. `+` match the previous term one or more times. `*` match the previous term zero or as many times as possible.

Match the `s` optionally:

day days

Use `prote` followed by a postfix:

prot prote proteeee

어떻게 하는가요? 프롯은 isearch 를 사용한다. 뭐든 좋다. 기본은 기본대로 해야 된다. 잠시만.

### Grouped matches

A group is enclosed inside escaped parentheses `\(GROUP\)`.

Match both of these, including the optional suffix `ig`:

conf config

&gt; 보자 보자!

`conf\(ig\)?` 를 이용해서 해보자. 즉 그룹을 만들어서 해당 영역을 묶는 것이다. 유용하다.

### Greedy versus non-greedy

Postfix charaacter are greedy by default. "Greedy" matches the longest possible part. Whereas "non-greedy" corresponds to the shortest.

A non-greedy variant is used when the postfix is followed by `?`.

Using the `.*` construct, match items both greedily and not:

Hello world Hello world world world world

&gt; \*\* Multiple groups

Match the alphabetic and numeric parts in two separate groups.

emacs27 emacs26 emacs25 emacs24

### Literal hyphen and dot

Match the hyphen as part of the alphabetic group and the dot as part of the numeric one.

emacs-27.1 emacs-26.3 emacs-25.2

### Exclude sets

To exclude a set you prepend a caret sign: `[^SET]`

Match every line except those that start with a capital letter.

GNU Emacs org-mode regexp emacs_lisp Linux guix

### Alternative groups with literal brackets

Use a character sets that matches `name` and `nom`.

name nom

Then:

1.  Match the `username` variants' `[name]` or `[nom]`.
2.  Replace the match with `[PROT]`.

&lt;username&gt;&lt;\![CDATA[name]]&gt;&lt;/username&gt; &lt;nameuser&gt;&lt;\![CDATA[nam]]&gt;&lt;/nameuser&gt; &lt;userName&gt;&lt;\![CDATA[nom]]&gt;&lt;/userName&gt; &lt;nameuser&gt;&lt;\![CDATA[nome]]&gt;&lt;/nameuser&gt;

### Either match

To target either set, use `\|`.

Prepend `vr/` to the first `group` and `match` on each line.

\`(group-0 ((group (:inherit modus-theme-intense-blue)))) \`(group-1 ((group (:inherit modus-theme-intense-magenta)))) \`(group-2 ((group (:inherit modus-theme-intense-green)))) \`(match-0 ((match (:inherit modus-theme-refine-yellow)))) \`(match-1 ((match (:inherit modus-theme-refine-yellow))))

### Running elisp functions on groups

Run elisp by escaping the comma `\,` and then following it with a symbol inside parentheses: `\,(FUNCTION)`.

Using the `.ired` pattern from earlier, run a replace command where you must execute the `upcase` function on the second/middle match. Keep the rest in tact.

direddireddired firedfiredfired miredmiredmired tiredtiredtired wiredwiredwired
